Add EIP: Add time-weighted averaging to the base fee (#7378)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7378.md

---
eip: 7378
title: Add time-weighted averaging to the base fee
description: Using geometric weights to average past block sizes into consideration
author: Guy Goren (@guy-goren) <guy.nahsholim@gmail.com>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/add-time-weighted-averaging-to-the-base-fee-mechanism/15142
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-07-22
---

## Abstract

The current formula for setting the base fee follows the original [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md):

> $$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$ where $i$ enumerates the blocks, $s^*$ is a predetremined block size (the "desired" size, aka gas amount), $b[i]$ is the base fee at block $i$, and $s[i]$ is the size of the block at height $i$. This formula considers only the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism might lead to incentives for users to bribe miners in order to reduce the base fee, or (in analogous manner) for miners to intiate a collusion with sophisticated users for the benefit of both. (See Motivation section.)

Author: Although the sentence "This formula considers only the last block size $s[i]$" is accurate, I understand what you mean. How would you phrase it to be clearer?

> $$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$ where $i$ enumerates the blocks, $s^*$ is a predetremined block size (the "desired" size, aka gas amount), $b[i]$ is the base fee at block $i$, and $s[i]$ is the size of the block at height $i$. This formula considers only the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism might lead to incentives for users to bribe miners in order to reduce the base fee, or (in analogous manner) for miners to intiate a collusion with sophisticated users for the benefit of both. (See Motivation section.)

Author: Done

> $$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$ where $i$ enumerates the blocks, $s^*$ is a predetremined block size (the "desired" size, aka gas amount), $b[i]$ is the base fee at block $i$, and $s[i]$ is the size of the block at height $i$. This formula considers only the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism might lead to incentives for users to bribe miners in order to reduce the base fee, or (in analogous manner) for miners to intiate a collusion with sophisticated users for the benefit of both. (See Motivation section.)

Reviewer: using `base fee update` clarifies this i think, so even though `base fee` already is an accumulator, `base fee update` which is the center of this proposal is just based off last block size.

> $$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$ where $i$ enumerates the blocks, $s^*$ is a predetremined block size (the "desired" size, aka gas amount), $b[i]$ is the base fee at block $i$, and $s[i]$ is the size of the block at height $i$. This formula considers only the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism might lead to incentives for users to bribe miners (proposer in PoS Ethereum) in order to reduce the base fee, or (in analogous manner) for miners to intiate a collusion with sophisticated users for the benefit of both. (See Motivation section.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

$$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$

where $i$ enumerates the blocks, $s^*$ is the desired block size, $b[i]$ is the base fee at block $i$, and $s[i]$ is the size of the block at height $i$. This formula considers only the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism incentivizes proposers to collude with users to manipulate the base fee.
```
Full-line math should be given its own line. Also, your abstract had a lot of redundancy.

We propose to consider the history of block sizes via a past wheighted average with a geometric sequence as the weights. In particular, we suggest the following update rule:

> $$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s_{\textit{avg}}[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$ where $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$ is defined by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s_{\textit{avg}}[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$

where $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$ is defined by
```
Again, full-line math needs full-line math

> $$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \frac{1-q}{q}\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} q^k\cdot s[i-k+1], \hspace{1cm}   q\in (0,1).$$ 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \frac{1-q}{q}\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} q^k\cdot s[i-k+1], \hspace{1cm} q\in (0,1)$$ 
```
Nit: typos

## Motivation

> Mainly, to reduce bribe motivation (in particular in case the demand for blockspace is high (see Incentive Considerations section). Additionaly, to reduce oscillations and have a more stable fee setting mechanism.

Reviewer 2: These are incomplete sentences.

For determining which messages enter a block, a miner uses a mechnism that was proposed in EIP-1559. This mechanism introduced a base fee, which is a portion of the transaction fee that is burned and not awarded to miners, and which varies according to the fill rate of blocks. A target block size is defined, such that if a block is fuller than the target size, the base fee increases and if it is emptier, the base fee reduces.

> Research on the subject have revealed issues with this transaction fee mechanism. It has been shown to be [unstable in cases](../assets/eip-7378/LMRSP.pdf). Moreover, it has been shown that the dynamic nature of the base fee, which is influenced by the fill rate of blocks, opens the door for [manipulation by miners and users](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf). The desired behavior of the system under a stable high demand, is for it to reach an equalibrium where the base fee -- $b$ -- is the significant part of the gas fee, and the tip is relatively small -- denoted $\varepsilon$ (for reference, Ethereum's base fee often has $\frac{b}{\varepsilon}\approx 20$). According to [Roughgarden](../assets/eip-7378/TR1559.pdf) this is a rational equalibrium under the assumption that miners do not think ahead. However, we expect a miner to optimize its behavior by also considering its future payoffs. In essence, since neither the miner nor the user are getting the burnt fee, by colluding they can both tap into the burnt fee for a win-win situation for them both.

Author: Actually, the analysis was even more conservative. To show the issues are in the core mechanism and not an implementation thing, the theoretical work modeled the randomness as perfect (e.g. unpredictable) and only considered expected gains vs. expected losses. In practice, due to the predictability (albeit limited), there should be fewer losses because an attacker might know in advance whether it will lose or profit.

> A [theorethical work](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf) describes how both miners and users can initiate an attack. For example, we can imagine that users who wish to pay lower costs will coordinate the attack. Roughly, a user (or group of users) that has transactions with a total $g$ amount of gas bribes the miner of the current block (no matter the miner's power) to propose an empty block instead. The cost of such a bribe is only $\varepsilon \times {s^* }$ -- the tip times the target block size. Consequently, the base fee reduces in the next block. If we accept that EIP-1559 reaches its goals, e.g., users would typicaly use a simple and honest bidding strategy of reporting their maximal willingness to pay plus adding a small tip ($\varepsilon$), then in the honest users' steady state, gas proposals leave the miners with an $\varepsilon$ tip. Given that other users are na\"ive (or slow to react), our bribing user will include its transactions with any tip larger than $\varepsilon$ -- making the attack profitable whenever $g \frac{b^* }{8} >s^* \varepsilon$.

Author: The described strategy can, in fact, be seen as another form of MEV. The fact that classic MEV (sandwich, front running, etc.) are not included, means that the proposed solutions to classic MEV (obscuring transactions etc.) will also not help against the described strategy. The problem that we tackle in this FIP is at the core of the base fee mechanism, with no further assumptions (such as MEV or predictability of randomness).

> A [theorethical work](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf) describes how both miners and users can initiate an attack. For example, we can imagine that users who wish to pay lower costs will coordinate the attack. Roughly, a user (or group of users) that has transactions with a total $g$ amount of gas bribes the miner of the current block (no matter the miner's power) to propose an empty block instead. The cost of such a bribe is only $\varepsilon \times {s^* }$ -- the tip times the target block size. Consequently, the base fee reduces in the next block. If we accept that EIP-1559 reaches its goals, e.g., users would typicaly use a simple and honest bidding strategy of reporting their maximal willingness to pay plus adding a small tip ($\varepsilon$), then in the honest users' steady state, gas proposals leave the miners with an $\varepsilon$ tip. Given that other users are na\"ive (or slow to react), our bribing user will include its transactions with any tip larger than $\varepsilon$ -- making the attack profitable whenever $g \frac{b^* }{8} >s^* \varepsilon$.

Reviewer: would be nice to add this argument to the rational...

## Specification

> The following equation describes the main part of the change, that is, replacing $s[i]$ by $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$. For $q\in (0,1)$,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following equation describes the main part of the change, that is, replacing $s[i]$ by $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$. $\forall q\in (0,1)$,
```
Use dedicated LaTeX forall symbol:

$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \frac{1-q}{q}\sum_{k=1}^{\infty } q^k\cdot s[i-k+1]$$ 

which simplifies to the recursive form

> $$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] = (1-q)\cdot s[i] + q\cdot s_{\textit{avg} }[i-1].$$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] = (1-q)\cdot s[i] + q\cdot s_{\textit{avg} }[i-1]$$
```
Typo and not enough newlines

This scheme is parametrized by $q$ which determins the concentration of the average. Roughly, smaller $q$ values result in $s_\textit{avg}$ resembling the very last block sizes, while larger $q$ values smoothen the average over a longer history.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
More extraneous newlines.

## Rationale

An intuitive option for the Transaction Fee Mechanism (TFM) that adjusts supply and demand economically is *First price auction*, which is well known and studied. Nevertheless, the Ethereum network choice was to use EIP-1559 for the TFM (one stated reason was to try and simplify the fee estimation for users, and reduce the advantage of sophisticated users). In this proposal, our design goal is to improve the TFM (of EIP-1559) by mitigating known problems that it raises. It is important to note that these problems severity are in direct relation to the demand for block space, and currently only mildly impact the Ethereum network. If demand to use Ethereum increases, however, these problems are expected to exacerbate. We may want to prepare for this beforehand.

> The change is based on [this work](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf) that described a rational strategy in which bribes are profitabe. Choosing to average based on a geometric series weights results in two desired properties: (i) the computation and space complexity are both in O(1), and (ii) the average gradually phases out the impact of a single outlier block without causing significant future fluctuations in the base fee.

Reviewer: Is there an analysis of smoothening that is proposed by this eip vs smoothening that can be done by base fee max change denominator?

Author: I apologize if I misinterpret the comment regarding the max change denominator. If the meaning is to reduce the learning rate $\phi$ from 1/8 to something smaller, then this is problematic as it significantly affects the responsiveness of the base fee, making it slow to respond to actual persisting changes. The reason for using geometric series weights is precisely to obtain the favorable tradeoff that still responds quickly while mitigating the incentive misalignments.

Reviewer: yes, i don't disagree that geometric weights are better, a short analysis /sim run like how it has been done for other things in the pdf would sort of complete the proposal that it can't be achieved with making the `max change denominator` changes. in any case, `max change denominator` argument needs to be included in the rational (like how you have articulated above)

> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Nit: more extraneous newlines.

One of the main goals of EIP-1559 was to simplify the bidding for users. It was articulated [theoreticaly by Roughgarden](../assets/eip-7378/TR1559.pdf) as users bidding their honest valuations being an optimal strategy. In contrast, when using first price auctions for the TFM (as done by Bitcoin and previously in Ethereum), it is typically sub-optimal for a user to bid its honest valuation. In other words, a TFM that encourages users to not fully reveal their preferences is considerd less good. However, one may argue that a TFM that encourages bribes is worse than a TFM that encourages not revealing one's full preferences.

Although a first price auction is a safe bet regarding TFMs, the Ethereum network chose to use EIP-1559 and burn transaction fees (perhaps for reasons other than game-theoretic ones). We therefore suggest to mitigate the current incentives for bribes using the above proposal.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Extra line

## Backwards Compatibility

> This change requires a hard fork since the base fee is enforced (for blocks to be considerd valid).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This change requires a hard fork since the base fee is enforced (for blocks to be considered valid).
```
Typo

## Test Cases

> Too early to say

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TBD
```
This is the standard placeholder

---
eip: 7378
title: Add time-weighted averaging to the base fee
description: Using geometric weights to average past block sizes into consideration
author: Guy Goren (@guy-goren) <guy.nahsholim@gmail.com>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/add-time-weighted-averaging-to-the-base-fee-mechanism/15142
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-07-22
---

## Abstract

> The current formula for setting the base fee follows the original [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This EIP proposes a new formula for the base fee, derived from [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md). The existing base fee formula,
```

$$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$

> where $i$ enumerates the blocks, $s^*$ is the desired block size, $b[i]$ is the base fee at block $i$, and $s[i]$ is the size of the block at height $i$. This formula considers only the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism incentivizes proposers to collude with users to manipulate the base fee.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
only considers the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism incentivizes proposers to collude with users to manipulate the base fee.
```
The abtract should be terse. Less-important details like this can and should be omitted.

> We propose to consider the history of block sizes via a past wheighted average with a geometric sequence as the weights. In particular, we suggest the following update rule:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We propose to consider the history of block sizes via a weighted average with a geometric sequence as the weights. In particular, we suggest the following formula:
```

> $$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s_{\textit{avg}}[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

$$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s_{\textit{avg}}[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$
```
Whoops missed adding a newline

> where $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$ is defined by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$ is defined by:
```
You use colons here. I assume you would like to here, too.

> $$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \frac{1-q}{q}\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} q^k\cdot s[i-k+1], \hspace{1cm} q\in (0,1)$$ 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \frac{1-q}{q}\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} q^k\cdot s[i-k+1], \hspace{1cm} q\in (0,1)$$ 
```
And again!

## Motivation

Mainly, to reduce bribe motivation (in particular in case the demand for blockspace is high (see Incentive Considerations section). Additionaly, to reduce oscillations and have a more stable fee setting mechanism.

> For determining which messages enter a block, a miner uses a mechnism that was proposed in EIP-1559. This mechanism introduced a base fee, which is a portion of the transaction fee that is burned and not awarded to miners, and which varies according to the fill rate of blocks. A target block size is defined, such that if a block is fuller than the target size, the base fee increases and if it is emptier, the base fee reduces.

Reviewer 2: Again, miner should be replaced with proposer.

---
eip: 7378
title: Add time-weighted averaging to the base fee
description: Using geometric weights to average past block sizes into consideration
author: Guy Goren (@guy-goren) <guy.nahsholim@gmail.com>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/add-time-weighted-averaging-to-the-base-fee-mechanism/15142
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-07-22
---

## Abstract

This EIP proposes a new formula for the base fee, derived from [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md). The existing base fee formula,

$$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$

only considers the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism incentivizes proposers to collude with users to manipulate the base fee.

> We propose to consider the history of block sizes via a weighted average with a geometric sequence as the weights. In particular, we suggest the following formula:

Reviewer 2: The wording "We propose to consider the history of block sizes via a weighted average with a geometric sequence as the weights." feels clunky. Additionally, the thing you're describing actually has a name: "exponential moving average". How about:

```suggestion
We propose that previous block sizes be considered by replacing the previous block size with an exponential moving average. In particular, we suggest the following formula:
```

The smoothing factor is also typically represented by $\alpha$

$$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s_{\textit{avg}}[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$

where $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$ is defined by:

$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \frac{1-q}{q}\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} q^k\cdot s[i-k+1], \hspace{1cm} q\in (0,1)$$ 

## Motivation

Mainly, to reduce bribe motivation (in particular in case the demand for blockspace is high (see Incentive Considerations section). Additionaly, to reduce oscillations and have a more stable fee setting mechanism.

> For determining which messages enter a block, a miner uses a mechnism that was proposed in EIP-1559. This mechanism introduced a base fee, which is a portion of the transaction fee that is burned and not awarded to miners, and which varies according to the fill rate of blocks. A target block size is defined, such that if a block is fuller than the target size, the base fee increases and if it is emptier, the base fee reduces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Proposers use a mechanism described in EIP-1559 to determine which messages to include in a block. This mechanism includes a "base fee": a portion of the transaction fee that is burned that varies according to the fill rate of blocks. A target block size is defined. If a block significantly exceeds the target size, the base fee increases, and if it is significantly smaller, the base fee lowers.
```
How about this phrasing? There are two non-grammatical errors in your original paragraph (miner -> proposer, mechnism -> mechanism).

A [theorethical work](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf) describes how both miners and users can initiate an attack. For example, we can imagine that users who wish to pay lower costs will coordinate the attack. Roughly, a user (or group of users) that has transactions with a total $g$ amount of gas bribes the miner of the current block (no matter the miner's power) to propose an empty block instead. The cost of such a bribe is only $\varepsilon \times {s^* }$ -- the tip times the target block size. Consequently, the base fee reduces in the next block. If we accept that EIP-1559 reaches its goals, e.g., users would typicaly use a simple and honest bidding strategy of reporting their maximal willingness to pay plus adding a small tip ($\varepsilon$), then in the honest users' steady state, gas proposals leave the miners with an $\varepsilon$ tip. Given that other users are na\"ive (or slow to react), our bribing user will include its transactions with any tip larger than $\varepsilon$ -- making the attack profitable whenever $g \frac{b^* }{8} >s^* \varepsilon$.

## Specification

> The following equation describes the main part of the change, that is, replacing $s[i]$ by $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$. $\forall q\in (0,1)$,
> 
> $$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \frac{1-q}{q}\sum_{k=1}^{\infty } q^k\cdot s[i-k+1]$$ 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$s[i]$ is replaced by $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$, where:

$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \frac{1-q}{q}\sum_{k=1}^{\infty } q^k\cdot s[i-k+1]$$ 
```
How about this? No need to over-complicate it

which simplifies to the recursive form

> $$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] = (1-q)\cdot s[i] + q\cdot s_{\textit{avg} }[i-1]$$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] = q\cdot s[i] + (1-q)\cdot s_{\textit{avg} }[i-1]$$
```
Is more standard

> This scheme is parametrized by $q$ which determins the concentration of the average. Roughly, smaller $q$ values result in $s_\textit{avg}$ resembling the very last block sizes, while larger $q$ values smoothen the average over a longer history.

Reviewer 2: There are a number of typos, and this does not read well. How about:

```suggestion
Where:

- $q\in(0, 1)$ is the smoothing factor. A higher smoothing factor means that the average responds more quickly to changes in block size.
```

---
eip: 7378
title: Add time-weighted averaging to the base fee
description: Using geometric weights to average past block sizes into consideration
author: Guy Goren (@guy-goren) <guy.nahsholim@gmail.com>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/add-time-weighted-averaging-to-the-base-fee-mechanism/15142
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-07-22
---

## Abstract

> 

Reviewer: I think the abstract can be shorter something along the lines of (rest should be moved in specification)

`To prevent proposers/miners and/or users from colluding and gaming the base fee in the scenario of consecutive proposals this EIP proposes a new formula to update the base fee by considering geometric weighted past block sizes instead of just the last block size.`

Author: The motivation builds on the reader familiarity with the formula. I therefore, find it useful to have it right at the beginning. If you feel strongly on the matter, I can rearrange the presentation.

> This EIP proposes a new formula for the base fee, derived from [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md). The existing base fee formula,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This EIP proposes a new formula to update the base fee, derived from [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md). The existing base fee is updated as follows,
```

Reviewer: also wouldn't the cost for empty blicj be based off on full block size and not the target block size (so cost increases 2x)

$$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$

only considers the last block size $s[i]$. This mechanism incentivizes proposers to collude with users to manipulate the base fee.

> We propose that previous block sizes be considered by replacing the previous block size with an exponential moving average. In particular, we suggest the following formula:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose that even previous block sizes be considered by replacing the last block size with an exponential moving average. In particular, we suggest the following base fee update formula:
```

$$b[i+1]\triangleq  b[i] \cdot \left( 1+\frac{1}{8} \cdot \frac{s_{\textit{avg}}[i]-s^* }{s^* }\right)$$

where $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$ is defined by:

$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \alpha\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} (1-\alpha)^k\cdot s[i-k+1]$$ 

and $\alpha\in(0,1)$ is a smoothing factor.

## Motivation

> Mainly, to reduce bribe motivation (in particular in case the demand for blockspace is high -- see Incentive Considerations section). Additionaly, to reduce oscillations and have a more stable fee setting mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reduce bribe motivation and block size oscillations especially when the demand for block space is high (see Incentive Considerations section), and hence have a more stable fee setting mechanism.
```

> Proposers use a mechanism described in EIP-1559 to determine which messages to include in a block. This mechanism includes a "base fee": a portion of the transaction fee that is burned. The base fee varies according to the fill rate of blocks. A target block size is defined. If a block exceeds the target size, the base fee increases, and if it is smaller, the base fee lowers.

Reviewer: can this be shortned assuming the audience is a bit aware of 1559

Author: It could certainly be omitted assuming the reader is familiar with the base fee mechanism. However, I believe that dedicating a few lines (approximately three) is reasonable to accommodate readers who may be less familiar with the topic.

Research on the subject have revealed issues with this transaction fee mechanism. It has been shown to be [unstable in cases](../assets/eip-7378/LMRSP.pdf). Moreover, it has been shown that the dynamic nature of the base fee, which is influenced by the fill rate of blocks, opens the door for [manipulation by miners (proposers) and users](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf). The desired behavior of the system under a stable high demand, is for it to reach an equalibrium where the base fee -- $b$ -- is the significant part of the gas fee, and the tip is relatively small -- denoted $\varepsilon$ (for reference, Ethereum's base fee often has $\frac{b}{\varepsilon}\approx 20$). According to [Roughgarden](../assets/eip-7378/TR1559.pdf) this is a rational equalibrium under the assumption that proposers do not think ahead. However, we expect a proposer to optimize its behavior by also considering its future payoffs. In essence, since neither the proposer nor the user are getting the burnt fee, by colluding they can both tap into the burnt fee for a win-win situation for them both.

> A [theorethical work](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf) describes how both proposers and users can initiate an attack. For example, we can imagine that users who wish to pay lower costs will coordinate the attack. Roughly, a user (or group of users) that has transactions with a total $g$ amount of gas bribes the proposer of the current block (no matter the proposer's power) to propose an empty block instead. The cost of such a bribe is only $\varepsilon \times {s^* }$ -- the tip times the target block size. Consequently, the base fee reduces in the next block. If we accept that EIP-1559 reaches its goals, e.g., users would typicaly use a simple and honest bidding strategy of reporting their maximal willingness to pay plus adding a small tip ($\varepsilon$), then in the honest users' steady state, gas proposals leave the proposers with an $\varepsilon$ tip. Given that other users are na\"ive (or slow to react), our bribing user will include its transactions with any tip larger than $\varepsilon$ -- making the attack profitable whenever $g \frac{b^* }{8} >s^* \varepsilon$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [theorethical work](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf) describes how both proposers and users can initiate such an attack. For example, we can imagine that users who wish to pay lower costs will coordinate the attack. Roughly, a user (or group of users) that has transactions with a total $g$ amount of gas bribes the proposer of the current block (no matter the proposer's power) to propose an empty block instead. The cost of such a bribe is only $\varepsilon \times {s^* }$ -- the tip times the target block size. Consequently, the base fee reduces in the next block. If we accept that EIP-1559 reaches its goals, e.g., users would typicaly use a simple and honest bidding strategy of reporting their maximal willingness to pay plus adding a small tip ($\varepsilon$), then in the honest users' steady state, gas proposals leave the proposers with an $\varepsilon$ tip. Given that other users are na\"ive (or slow to react), our bribing user will include its transactions with any tip larger than $\varepsilon$ -- making the attack profitable whenever $g \frac{b^* }{8} >s^* \varepsilon$.
```

Reviewer: also wouldn't the cost for empty block be based off on full block size and not the target block size (so cost increases 2x)

Reviewer: use `,` instead of `--`

## Specification

$s[i]$ is replaced by $s_{\textit{avg}}[i]$, where:

$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] \triangleq \alpha\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} (1-\alpha)^k\cdot s[i-k+1]$$ 

which simplifies to the recursive form

$$s_{\textit{avg}}[i] = \alpha\cdot s[i] + (1-\alpha)\cdot s_{\textit{avg}}[i-1]$$

> where $\alpha\in(0, 1)$ is the smoothing factor. A higher smoothing factor means that the average responds more quickly to changes in block size.

Reviewer: imo a remark that for `\alpha=1` this scheme degenerates to the current base fee update formula would provide a good insight into the proposal

The change is based on [this work](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf) that described a rational strategy in which bribes are profitabe. Choosing to average based on a geometric series weights results in two desired properties: (i) the computation and space complexity are both in O(1), and (ii) the average gradually phases out the impact of a single outlier block without causing significant future fluctuations in the base fee.

### Incentive Considerations

> The proposal is designed to improve the incentive compatability of the TFM. A [game theoretic analysys](../assets/eip-7378/AGHH.pdf) shows that a TFM based on EIP-1559 encourages bribes. Roughly, because the base fee in the next block depends on the size of the the current block, a proposer that creates an empty block reduces the base fee of the next block by a factor of $\frac{1}{8}$. The opportunity cost for mining an empty block instead of a normal block is only the tips it contains. Thus, the cost of bribing a proposer is only compansating it for the lost tips. In case the base fee is significantly larger than the tips, the bribing user gains a siginificant reduction in the base fees of the next block, making the bribe profitable. 

Reviewer: i feel that this section is repeat of whats in tne motivation, may be it can be shorted or skipped even as the pdfs linked provide a full construction and explanations
